# IFEX Documentation Overview

## Reading

These documents are available:

- Overall specification, including introductory and explaining chapters, plus the formal syntax of the core IDL/model: [ifex-specification.md](./ifex-specification.md)
- Tips and information for developers: [developers-manual.md](./developers-manual.md)

# Developing / generating

Documentation is generated by a combination of tools and steps:

## Tools:
- [Github actions workflow](/.github/workflows/generate_documentation.yml) encodes the build steps.
- [markup-markdown](https://github.com/hailiang-wang/markup-markdown) is used to combine several markdown files into one.  Some markdown files are static and stored in [[doc-parts]], whereas some are generated from source files.  The naming convention for the definition files are `*.m.md`
- [ifex_ast_doc.py](../ifex/model/ifex_ast_doc.py) generates the main syntax documentation from the datatypes used in the internal model AST.  The YAML language definition for the IDL is a 1-1 equivalence with the internal model, and is thus actually defined using python source: [ifex_ast.py](../ifex/model/ifex_ast.py)
- The script [create-toc.py](create-toc.py) is used to generate a Table of Contents for the document.

## Source files:
- [def-specification.stage1.m.md](./def-specification.stage1.m.md).  Lists the parts required to produce the main specification.
- [def-specification.stage2.m.md](./def-specification.stage2.m.md).  To combine the specification with the table-of-contents.
- [ifex_ast.py](../ifex/model/ifex_ast.py) is the python source that is interpreted to produce `generated-syntax.md`
- [GitHub actions workflow](./.github/workflow/generate_documentation.yml) defines the build steps.
- [def-developers-manual.m.md](./def-developers-manual.m.md) lists the parts required to produce the developer documentation.

## Build sequence

For developers manual:
- Generate `developers-manual.md` by concatenating multiple files, as specified in `def-developers-manual.m.md`

For main manual:
- Build `generated-syntax.md` from python source file.
- Stage 1: Concatenate files as specified in `def-specification.stage1.m.md` to produce temporary file (generated-specification.stage1.md)
- Build Table of Contents (ToC) into temporary file (`generated-toc.md`)
- Stage 2: Build final `ifex-specification.md` by concatenating ToC and specification-contents, as specified by `def-specification.stage2.m.md`

Deployment:
- The GitHub actions workflow goes on to publish the results of the docs directory to the gh-pages branch, which makes it visible at [https://covesa.github.io/ifex-tools](https://covesa.github.io/ifex-tools)
